# Exceptional collections and Čech cohomology

We have developed most of the background necessary to describe 
the derived category $D^b(\operatorname{coh} \mathbb{P}_k^n)$ 
but we require one more important notion. 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal T$ be a $k$-linear triangulated 
category. An object $E$ is ($k$-)_exceptional_ if 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E,E[l]) = 
\begin{cases} 0 & l \neq 0 \\ k\cdot 1_E & l = 0 \end{cases}
$$

A sequence of objects $E_1,\ldots,E_s$ is called an 
_exceptional collection_ if 
- each $E_i$ is exceptional  
- and
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E_i,E_j[l]) = 0
$$
for all $l$ and $j < i$. 

We say an exceptional colletion is _strong_ if 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E_i,E_j[l]) = 0
$$
for all $l \neq 0$. 

An exceptional collection is _full_ if it generates $\mathcal T$. 

Assume we have an abelian category $\mathcal A$ and a 
full exceptional collection for $D^\dagger(\mathcal A)$. 

Since full exceptional collections generate, we can apply 
the 
[results](https://738.f21.matthewrobertballard.com/notes/2021_10_14/)
from last semester to get an equivalence 
$$
D(\mathcal A) \cong \operatorname{perf} A 
$$
where 
$$
A = \mathbf{R}\operatorname{End}\left( \bigoplus E_i \right)
$$

If, in addition, the collection is strong then we can take 
$$
A = \operatorname{End}\left( \bigoplus E_i \right)
$$
and $D^\dagger(\mathcal A)$ is equivalent to the category 
of perfect complexes of modules over an honest $k$-algebra. 
This algebra is usually non-commutative. 

We can now state a 
[fundamental result of Beilinson](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01681436).

**Theorem**. For any $i \in \mathbb{Z}$, the sheaves 
$$
\mathcal O(i-n),\ldots,\mathcal O(i-1), \mathcal O(i)
$$
form a full strong exceptional collection for 
$D^b(\operatorname{coh} \mathbb{P}^n_k)$. 

Showing that something is a full (strong) exceptional collection 
breaks up into two parts: 
- a computation to check that vanishing of the appropriate Hom spaces and 
- a generation check. 

We handle the generation statement now and the cohomology 
computation after introducing Čech cohomology. 

**Lemma**. We have 
$$
\mathcal O(j) \in \langle \mathcal O(i-n),\ldots,\mathcal O(i-1), \mathcal O(i) \rangle_{\infty}
$$

{{#proof}}
The Koszul complex $K(x_0,\ldots,x_n)$ yields an exact 
complex of graded modules 
$$
0 \to R(-n-1) \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n R(-n+1) 
\to \cdots \\ \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n R(-1) \to R \to 
R/(x_0,\ldots,x_n) \to 0  
$$
Applying $\widetilde{(-)}$ gives the exact sequence 
$$
0 \to \mathcal O(-n-1) \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n \mathcal O(-n+1) 
\to \cdots \\ \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n \mathcal O(-1) \to \mathcal O \to 0 
$$
Twisting by $\mathcal O(i)$ we get an exact sequence 
$$
0 \to \mathcal O(i-n-1) \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n \mathcal O(i-n+1) 
\to \cdots \\ \to \bigoplus_{i=0}^n \mathcal O(i-1) \to \mathcal O(i) \to 0
$$
Consequently, if we have $\mathcal O(i-n),\ldots,\mathcal O(i-1), \mathcal O(i)$ we can generate both $\mathcal O(i-n-1)$ and 
$\mathcal O(i+1)$. 
{{/proof}}

**Lemma**. We have 
$$
\mathcal F \in \langle \mathcal O(i-n),\ldots,\mathcal O(i-1), \mathcal O(i) \rangle_{\infty}
$$
for any coherent sheaf $\mathcal F$.

{{#proof}}
We have $\mathcal F = \widetilde{M}$ for a finitely-
generated graded module $M$. From the previous lemma and the 
fact $\widetilde{(-)}$ is exact, it is enough to show we can 
generate $M$ from $\mathcal O(j)$ for $j \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

Inductively, we can construct an exact sequence 
$$
F^l \to F^{l+1} \to \cdots F^0 \to M \to 0 
$$
with 
$$
F^i = \bigoplus_{j = 1}^r R(m_{ij})
$$
Since $k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ is regular and graded local, we 
have the kernel $F^{-n} \to F^{-n+1}$ is free. Thus, for $j > n+1$, 
the extension of $M$ by $K^{-j}$
$$
0 \to K^{-j} \to F^{-j} \to \cdots \to F^0 \to M \to 0
$$
is $0$ and 
$$
F^{-j} \to \cdots \to F^0 \cong M \oplus K^{-j}[j]
$$
in the derived category. So we generate $M$. 
{{/proof}}

**Lemma**. The collection 
$$
\mathcal O(i-n),\ldots,\mathcal O(i-1), \mathcal O(i)
$$
generates $D^b(\operatorname{coh} \mathbb{P}_k^n)$. 

{{#proof}}
Any complex $C$ with $H^i(C) = 0$ for $i \gg 0$ and $0 \gg i$ 
is an iterated sequence of cones of the form 
$$
\operatorname{cone}(H^j(C)[j+1] \to C_{j+1})
$$
where $C_m = H^m(C)[m]$ for maximal $m$ with $H^m(C) \neq 0$. 
Thus, we can generate a bounded complex using its 
cohomology sheaves -- which we generated in the last lemma. 
{{/proof}}

To finish the proof of Beilinson's result, we need to compute 
$$
\operatorname{Ext}^l(\mathcal O(i),\mathcal O(j)) \cong 
H^l(\mathbb{P}^n_k, \mathcal O(j-i))
$$
We will do this next. 

## Čech cohomology 

The universal way to "compute" $H^i(X,\mathcal F)$ is to 
- replace $\mathcal F$ with an injective resolution,
- apply $\Gamma(X,-)$, and 
- compute cohomology of the resulting complex of $k$-modules.

Unfortunately, projective resolutions are hard enough to handle 
and we have some very explicit projective modules. Injective 
objects are generally more complicated. Having enough 
control over their explicit structure to compute cohomology of 
a sequence is a big ask.

However, there is a bit more flexibility in computing derived 
using 
[adapated objects](https://738.f21.matthewrobertballard.com/notes/2021_09_09/#adapted-objects) 

If we can construct a resolution
$$
0 \to \mathcal F \to \mathcal A^0 \to \mathcal A^1 \to \cdots 
$$
with 
$$
H^i(X,\mathcal A^j) = 0, ~\forall i > 0 
$$
then 
$$
H^i(X,\mathcal F) \cong H^i (\Gamma(X,\mathcal A^\bullet))
$$

[Recall](https://738.f21.matthewrobertballard.com/notes/2021_11_30/#spectra-of-commutative-rings) 
that $\Gamma(X,-)$ is yields an equivalence between 
$\operatorname{Qcoh} X$ and $\operatorname{Mod} R$ if 
$X = \operatorname{Spec} R$. Consequently, if $\mathcal F$ is a 
quasi-coherent sheaf supported on affine patch, then 
$$
H^i(X,\mathcal F) = 0, ~\forall i > 0 
$$
for general $\mathcal F$. 

For a general $\mathcal F$ and open cover $U_1,\ldots,U_n$ 
by affines, each $\mathcal F|_{U_i}$ is adapted and we have 
the obvious map 
$$
\mathcal F \to \bigoplus_{i=1}^n \mathcal F|_{U_i}
$$
Since $\mathcal F$ is a sheaf, this is injective but it is rarely 
surjective. 

To fix it and make a resolution, let 
$$
\check{C}^s(\mathcal F) := \bigoplus_{i_0 < \cdots < i_s} 
\mathcal F|_{U_{i_0} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_s}}
$$
and 
$$
\delta^s : \check{C}^s(\mathcal F) \to \check{C}^{s+1}(\mathcal F)
$$
where the map 
$$
\delta^s : F|_{U_{i_0} \cap \cdots \widehat{U_{i_j}} \cdots \cap U_{i_s}} \to F|_{U_{i_0} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_s}}
$$
is restricting scaled by $(-1)^j$. 

**Lemma**. $\check{C}^\bullet(\mathcal F)$ is a resolution. 

{{#proof}}
It suffices to check exactness on stalks where each restriction 
map inducts an isomorphisms. Inclusion-exclusion says this is 
exact. 
{{/proof}}

**Lemma**. If each $U_{i_0} \cap \cdots \cap U_{i_s}$ is affine, 
then 
$$
H^i(X,\mathcal F) \cong H^i(\Gamma(X,\check{C}^\bullet(\mathcal F)))
$$

{{#proof}}
As discussed above, we have a resolution by sheaves adapted to 
$\Gamma(X,-)$. 
{{/proof}}

It would be nice to know that given two affines $U,V$ in $X$ 
the intersection $U \cap V$ is also affine. Such a scheme is 
called _semi-separated_. 

A _separated_ scheme is one where the diagonal morphism is 
a closed immersion. This implies semi-separated. 

We will sidestep the generalities here because we will use 
very specific affines: principal opens in $\operatorname{Proj} 
R$. Here the intersection is another principal open so 
the conditions of the previous lemma are immediate. 

In our example of $\mathbb{P}_k^n$ we use the principal opens 
$U_{x_i}$. Then, $\Gamma(X,\mathcal O(l)) =$
$$
0 \to \bigoplus k[x_0,\ldots,x_n,x_i^{-1}]_l \to \cdots \to 
k[x_0,\ldots,x_n,(x_0\ldots x_n)^{-1}]_l \to 0
$$

It makes sense to sum over $l$ and consider the complex 
$$
0 \to \bigoplus k[x_0,\ldots,x_n,x_i^{-1}] \to \cdots \to 
k[x_0,\ldots,x_n,(x_0\ldots x_n)^{-1}] \to 0
$$
of graded $k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ modules all at once.
