# Compact generation and Grothendieck duality

We saw last semester that compact generation of a triangulated category 
was a very useful property. Here we establish that $D(\operatorname{Qcoh} X)$ 
is compactly generated for a quasi-projective schemes $X$ over an affine 
base. In addition, we provide some useful replacements for deriving common 
functors. 

**Lemma**. Let $R$ be a $\mathbb{Z}$-graded ring. Then $R(i)$ for $i \in 
\mathbb{Z}$ is a set of compact generators for $D(\operatorname{GrMod} R)$. 

{{#proof}}
One checks that 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(R(i)[j],C) \cong H^{-j}(C)_i 
$$
Thus, if $C$ is right orthogonal to all $R(i)$ it must be acyclic. 
{{/proof}}

**Proposition**. If $R$ is finitely-generated in degree $1$ over $R_0$, 
then $D(\operatorname{Qcoh} \operatorname{Proj} R)$ is compactly generated. 

{{#proof}}
Let $X = \operatorname{Proj} R$. Recall that we [have](2022_01_11.md) a SOD 
$$
D(\operatorname{GrMod} R) = \langle D(\operatorname{Tors} R), 
D(\operatorname{Qcoh} X) \rangle 
$$
Given by $\widetilde{(-)}$ and $\underline{\Gamma}$. Thus, 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(\mathcal O(i)[j], F) \cong 
\operatorname{Hom}(R(i)[j], \underline{Gamma}(F) )
$$
This vanishes for all $i,j \in \mathbb{Z}$ if and only if $\underline{\Gamma}(F)$ 
is acyclic. As 
$$
\widetilde{ \underline{\Gamma} (F)} \cong F
$$
we see that $F$ is acyclic also. 
{{/proof}}

**Lemma**. If $D(\operatorname{Qcoh} X)$ is compactly-generated and $U$ is an 
open subscheme, then so is $U$. 

{{#proof}}
Let $l : U \to X$ denote the inclusion. Then the counit 
$$
l^\ast \mathbf{R} l_\ast F \to F
$$
is an isomorphism. Thus, if $C_i$ is a set of compact generators for $X$, then 
$l^\ast C_i$ is for $U$. 
{{/proof}}

**Corollary**. Let $X$ be quasi-projective over an affine base. Then any compact 
object is quasi-isomorphic to a bounded complex of locally-free sheaves. 

{{#proof}}
We have seen that $\mathcal O_X(i)$ form a set of compact generators. 
As we saw [last semester](https://738.f21.matthewrobertballard.com/notes/2021_10_05/), 
the compact objects in $D(\operatorname{Qcoh} X)$ 
are summands of iterated cones over maps to objects from the set of compact generators. 
Such a complex is bounded and has locally-free components. 
{{/proof}}

We saw [last time](2022_01_18.md) that $E \mapsto E(-n-1)[n]$ is the Serre 
functor on $\mathbb{P}^n_k$. In fact, this is a consequence of a more general 
fact known as _Grothendieck duality_. One formulation of Grothendieck duality 
is that for a map $f: X \to Y$ of schemes possesses a right adjoint 
$$
f^! : D(\operatorname{Qcoh} Y \to \operatorname{Qcoh} X)
$$
to $\mathbf{R}f_\ast$. This is not automatic in full generality. But it is 
true with mild conditions on $X$ and $Y$. 

For the projection $\pi : \mathbb{P}^n_k \to \operatorname{Spec} k}$ we have 
$$
\pi^! \mathcal O_{\operatorname{Spec} k} \cong \mathcal O(-n-1)[n] 
$$

Originally proof of the existence of a right adjoint was arduous. However, 
[Neeman](https://www.ams.org/journals/jams/1996-9-01/S0894-0347-96-00174-
9/S0894-0347-96-00174-9.pdf) 
demonstrated how Brown Representability can be used to give a clean 
proof. 

Thanks to Brown Representability, we know that for $\mathbf{R}f_\ast$ to 
have a right adjoint is equivalent to the natural map 
$$
\bigoplus_{i \in I} \mathbf{R}f_\ast E_i \to \mathbf{R} f_\ast 
\left( \bigoplus E_i \right) 
$$
being an isomorphism for all sums. This question is local on $Y$ so 
we reduce to asking -- when does taking cohomology commute with direct sums? 

One useful fact: formation of the Čech complex for an affine cover where all 
intersections are affine commutes with direct sums.

**Proposition**. For any map $f: X \to Y$ between quasi-projective schemes over 
an affine base, there is a righ adjoint $f^!$ to $\mathbf{R}f_\ast$. 

{{#proof}}
From the discussion above, we reduce to the checking the case where $Y$ is affine. 
Here we are computing global sections over a quasi-affine scheme which can be 
done using a Čech complex. 
{{/proof}}

**Remark**. Neeman proves the existence of $f^!$ whenver $X$ and $Y$ are 
quasi-compact and quasi-separated. 

## Derived tensor and Hom 

We have implicitly used both the tensor product 
$$
E \otimes_{\mathcal O_X} F
$$
and sheaf Hom
$$
\mathcal Hom_{\mathcal O_X}(E,F)
$$
of $\mathcal O_X$-modules. 

Recall that $E$ is _locally-free_ if each $p \in X$ has a neighborhood $U$ with 
$$
E|_U \cong \mathcal O_U^{\oplus I} 
$$
Since exactness can be checked locally, $E \otimes_{\mathcal O_X} -$ preserves 
exactness of complexes of $\mathcal O_X$-modules if $E$ is locally-free. Thus, if we 
can replace any complex with one whose components are locally-free, we can use 
these adapted objects to derive $\otimes_{\mathcal O_X}$.

**Proposition**. For any quasi-projective schemes $X$ and any chain complex $E$ 
of quasi-coherent sheaves, there is complex $P$ with locally-free components 
and a quasi-isomorphism $P \to E$. 

{{#proof}}
It suffices to prove this for projective $X$. Any complex of quasi-coherent sheaves 
on $X$ is of the form $\widetilde{C}$ for some complex of graded modules $C$. 
There are enough K-projectives in $K(\operatarname{GrMod} R)$. Indeed, the twists 
of $R$ suffice. Thus, we get a $K$-projective $P$ and a quasi-isomorphism $P \to C$. 
Applying $\widetilde{(-)}$ gives the result. 
{{/proof}}

Note that despite the notation we cannot find enough K-projective complexes in 
$D(\operatorname{Qcoh} X)$.

Using this result, we take 
$$
E \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes} - := P \otimes - 
$$
for some such $P$. 

Similarly, we can derive $\mathcal Hom(E,F)$ by replacing $E$ by a complex of 
locally-frees or $F$ by a K-injective. The choices are naturally quasi-isomorphic 
so we denote either by 
$$
\mathbf{R}\mathcal Hom(E,F).
$$
